How to use custom data to style your TalkJS chat (#11)
talkjs/tutorials: how-to-use-custom-data-to-style-your-talkjs-chat/how-to-use-custom-data-to-style-your-chat.md

# How to use custom data to style your TalkJS chat

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to expand on this intro with an example - the marketplace example from Slack would work well.

Also explain why it's not feasible (you'd end up with too many themes)

> You might often have situations where you want to style your chat differently for different users. Creating a theme for different subsets of users is not feasible. TalkJS gives you the option to pass custom data to the theme that you can use to style your chat.

Reviewer: Adding a bit more detail on how it works and linking to docs earlier in the tutorial

```suggestion
You might often have situations where you want to style your chat differently for different users. Creating a theme for different subsets of users is not feasible. TalkJS gives you the option to [pass custom data to your theme](https://talkjs.com/docs/Features/Themes/Passing_Data_to_Themes). You can then access this data as a [CSS custom property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties) in the Theme Editor and use it to style your chat.
```

If you followed our [Getting Started](https://talkjs.com/docs/Getting_Started/) guide, you'll have a single div with the id `talkjs-container`. There are also some inline styles applied to this div. You must replace this HTML code with the block given below.

```html
<div class="container">
  <div id="talkjs-container-1" class="column">
    <i>Loading chat...</i>
  </div>
  <div id="talkjs-container-2" class="column">
    <i>Loading chat...</i>
  </div>
  <div id="talkjs-container-3" class="column">
    <i>Loading chat...</i>
  </div>
</div>
```

### Moving the inline styles to a stylesheet

Notice how we've moved the inline styles out into a stylesheet. For this, you must create a `styles.css` file in the project directory and paste the following styles. If you cloned the Github project, you can skip this step.

```css
.container {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: space-between;
    height: 500px;
    margin: 30px;
}
.column {
    flex: 1;
}
```

To reference the `styles.css` file in your `index.html` file, paste the following line in the `<head>` section.

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">
```

## Passing custom data to the chatboxes

> 

Reviewer: Intro looks good!

```javascript
let conversation1 = talkSession.getOrCreateConversation("customStyleChat1");
let conversation2 = talkSession.getOrCreateConversation("customStyleChat2");
let conversation3 = talkSession.getOrCreateConversation("customStyleChat3");

conversation1.setParticipant(me);
conversation1.setParticipant(other1);

conversation2.setParticipant(me);
conversation2.setParticipant(other2);

conversation3.setParticipant(me);
conversation3.setParticipant(other3);
```

Next, we create three chatboxes and [pass data to the theme](https://talkjs.com/docs/Features/Themes/Passing_Data_to_Themes/). The variable name `accentColor` is something we've used in this example, but you can change it to whatever makes sense for you.

```javascript
const chatbox1 = talkSession.createChatbox({
  theme: {
    custom: {
      accentColor: '#EE4B2B',
    },
  },
});

const chatbox2 = talkSession.createChatbox({
  theme: {
    custom: {
      accentColor: '#E69597',
    },
  },
});

const chatbox3 = talkSession.createChatbox({
  theme: {
    custom: {
      accentColor: '#56AE57',
    },
  },
});
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we've set the colors directly. In a more realistic example, you may instead want to pass in a variable that you set based on, for example, the current user or page.

```

Lastly, we select the created conversations and mount the three chatboxes.

```javascript
chatbox1.select(conversation1);
chatbox2.select(conversation2);
chatbox3.select(conversation3);
  
chatbox1.mount(document.getElementById("talkjs-container-1"));
chatbox2.mount(document.getElementById("talkjs-container-2"));
chatbox3.mount(document.getElementById("talkjs-container-3"));
```

## Using the custom data in the TalkJS theme

> Go to your TalkJS dashboard, and navigate to the **Themes** tab. Click **Edit** next to the **customDataToTheme** theme. Go to the "UserMessage" component and find the `.by-me .message` CSS class. Change the values of the `border-color` and `background-color` properties to `var(--theme-accentColor)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to your TalkJS dashboard, and navigate to the **Themes** tab. Click **Edit** next to the "customDataToTheme" theme. Go to the **UserMessage** component and find the `.by-me .message` CSS class. Change the values of the `border-color` and `background-color` properties to `var(--theme-accentColor)`.
```

Now, go to the "MessageField" component and find the following CSS class.

```css
.is-typing .send-button,
.record-button:hover,
.location-button:hover,
.attachment-button:hover,
.emoji-button:hover
```

Change the value of the `color` property to `var(--theme-accentColor);`.

Lastly, go to the "ChatHeader" component and find the `header` CSS class. Change the value of the `background-color` CSS property to `var(--theme-accentColor)`. TalkJS autosaves all your changes automatically.

## Conclusion

<figure class="kg-image-card">
  <img class="kg-image" src="2-demo.gif" alt="Each chat is styled differently based on the data passed to the theme."/>
  <figcaption>Each chat is styled differently based on the data passed to the theme.</figcaption>
</figure>

You now know how to use custom data to style your TalkJS chat. To recap, in this tutorial you have:

- Passed custom data while creating chatboxes
- Accessed the custom data in your TalkJS theme

> - Style different components using the custom data

Author: Should this be "styles" or "styled"? @keerlu

> - Style different components using the custom data

Reviewer: Oops, yes should be "styled"!

For the full example code for this tutorial, see our [GitHub repo](). <!-- Add Github link -->

If you want to learn more about TalkJS, here are some good places to start:

> - The [TalkJS Docs](https://talkjs.com/docs/) help you get started with TalkJS.
> - [TalkJS tutorials](https://talkjs.com/resources/tag/tutorials/) provide how-to guides for many common TalkJS use cases.
> - The [talkjs-examples Github repo](https://github.com/talkjs/talkjs-examples) has larger complete examples that demonstrate how to integrate with other libraries and frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [TalkJS docs](https://talkjs.com/docs/) help you get started with TalkJS.
- [TalkJS tutorials](https://talkjs.com/resources/tag/tutorials/) provide how-to guides for many common TalkJS use cases.
- The [talkjs-examples GitHub repo](https://github.com/talkjs/talkjs-examples) has larger complete examples that demonstrate how to integrate with other libraries and frameworks.
```

# How to use custom data to style your TalkJS chat

> You might often have situations where you want to style your chat differently for different users. Creating a theme for different subsets of users is not feasible. TalkJS gives you the option to [pass custom data to your theme](https://talkjs.com/docs/Features/Themes/Passing_Data_to_Themes). You can then access this data as a [CSS custom property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties) in the Theme Editor and use it to style your chat.
> 
> Imagine running a marketplace and you want different accent colors for chatboxes for different users. Creating a theme for each accent color you want would result in a large number of themes. This is difficult to manage and not the right way to go.

Reviewer: Condensing the changes a bit:

```suggestion
You might often have situations where you want to style your chat differently for different users. For example, imagine you run a marketplace where you want different accent colors for different sellers. Creating a theme for each seller would result in an unmanageable number of themes.

TalkJS gives you the option to [pass custom data to your theme](https://talkjs.com/docs/Features/Themes/Passing_Data_to_Themes). You can then access this data as a [CSS custom property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties) in the Theme Editor and use it to style your chat.

```

<figure class="kg-image-card">
  <img class="kg-image" src="1-custom-styled-chats.png" alt="Styling chats differently using custom data in the same theme."/>
  <figcaption>You can style chats using custom data without creating multiple themes.</figcaption>
</figure>

In this tutorial, we're going to showcase three chats each with a different `accentColor` passed to the theme and rendered differently. The following sections highlight the main topics that we'll cover:

* Passing custom data to the chatboxes
* Using the custom data in the TalkJS theme

To follow along, you’ll need:

- A [TalkJS account]|(https://talkjs.com/dashboard/login). TalkJS provides a ready-to-use chat client for your application. Your account gives you access to TalkJS's free development environment.
- An existing TalkJS project using the [JavaScript Chat SDK](https://talkjs.com/docs/Reference/JavaScript_Chat_SDK/). See our [Getting Started]|(https://talkjs.com/docs/Getting_Started/) guide for an example of how to set this up.

> We’ll build up the feature step by step in the following sections. If you would rather see the complete example code, see the [GitHub repo]() for this tutorial. <!-- Add Github link -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ll build up the feature step by step in the following sections. If you would rather see the complete example code, see the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/talkjs/talkjs-examples/tree/master/howtos/how-to-use-custom-data-to-style-your-talkjs-chat) for this tutorial.
```

Now, go to the **MessageField** component and find the following CSS class.

```css
.is-typing .send-button,
.record-button:hover,
.location-button:hover,
.attachment-button:hover,
.emoji-button:hover
```

Change the value of the `color` property to `var(--theme-accentColor);`.

Lastly, go to the **ChatHeader** component and find the `header` CSS class. Change the value of the `background-color` CSS property to `var(--theme-accentColor)`. TalkJS autosaves all your changes automatically.

## Conclusion

<figure class="kg-image-card">
  <img class="kg-image" src="2-demo.gif" alt="Each chat is styled differently based on the data passed to the theme."/>
  <figcaption>Each chat is styled differently based on the data passed to the theme.</figcaption>
</figure>

You now know how to use custom data to style your TalkJS chat. To recap, in this tutorial you have:

- Passed custom data while creating chatboxes
- Accessed the custom data in your TalkJS theme
- Styled different components using the custom data

> For the full example code for this tutorial, see our [GitHub repo](). <!-- Add Github link -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full example code for this tutorial, see our [GitHub repo](https://github.com/talkjs/talkjs-examples/tree/master/howtos/how-to-use-custom-data-to-style-your-talkjs-chat).
```
